
DRAM
	1. the cells (bits) in a DRAM chip are partitioned into d supercells, each consisting of w DRAM cells. 
	   A d * w DRAM stores a total of d * w bits of information. The supercells are organized as 
	   a rectangular array with r rows and c columns, where r * c = d. Each supercell has an address of
	   the form (i, j)
	2. information flows in and out of the DRAM chip via external connectors called pins. Each pin carries 
	   a 1-bit signal
	3.  memory controller sends the row address i to the DRAM, followed by the column address j to access DRAM.
	    The row address i is called a RAS (row access strobe) request. The column address j is called a CAS
	    (column access strobe) request. Notice that the RAS and CAS requests share the same DRAM address pins
	4. DRAM chips are packaged in memory modules
	
	5. a conventional DRAM copies an entire row of supercells into its internal row buffer, uses one, 
	   and then discards the rest.

Synchronous DRAM (SDRAM)
	 conventional DRAMs are asynchronous in the sense that they communicate with the memory controller using 
	 a set of explicit control signals. SDRAM replaces many of these control signals with the rising edges of 
	 the same external clock signal that drives the memory controller to be faster

Double Data-Rate Synchronous DRAM(DDR SDRAM)
	doubles the speed of the SDRAM by using both clock edges as control signals. Different types of DDR SDRAMs 
	are characterized by the size of a small prefetch buffer that increases the effective bandwidth: 
	DDR (2bits), DDR2 (4 bits), and DDR3 (8 bits)
	 
Disk
	1. each track on the surface of a platter of a disk is partitioned into a collection of sectors separated 
	   by gaps whereno data bits are stored. 
	2. gaps store formatting bits that identify sectors.
	3. each sector contains an equal number of data bits (typically 512 bytes)
	4. data can be encode in both 2 surfaces of a platter  
	
	5. the original disks, designed in an age of low areal density, partitioned every track into the same number 
	   of sectors, which was determined by the number of sectors that could be recorded on the innermost track
	6. modern high-capacity disks use a technique known as multiple zone recording, where the set of cylinders 
	   is partitioned into disjoint subsets known as recording zones. Each zone consists of a contiguous collection 
	   of cylinders. Each track in each cylinder in a zone has the same number of sectors, which is determined 
	   by the number of sectors that can be packed into theinnermost track of the zone
	   
	7. disks read and write data in sector-size blocks. The access time for a sector has three main components: 
	   seek time, rotational latency, and transfer time
	   
	8. modern disks present a simpler view of their geometry as a sequence of B sector-size logical blocks, 
	   numbered 0, 1, ..., B − 1. A small hardware/firmware device in the disk package, called the disk controller, 
	   maintains the mapping between logical block numbers and actual (physical) disk sectors.
	   
	9. low level formmat: before a disk can be used to store data, it must be formatted by the disk controller
		1. filling in the gaps between sectors with information that identifies the sectors
		2. identifying any cylinders with surface defects and taking them out of action
		3. setting aside a set of cylinders in each zone as spares
	
	10. direct memory access (DMA)
		 CPU → I/O (read): 
		 	1. sends a command word that tells the disk to initiate a read, along with other parameters 
			   such as whether to interrupt the CPU when the read is finished
			2. indicates the logical block number that should be read. 
			3. indicates the main memory address where the contents of the disk sector should be stored.

solid state disk (SSD) 
	1. an SSD package consists of one or more flash memory chips with a flash translation layer plays the same role 
	   as a disk controller
	2. a flash memory consists of a sequence of blocks, where each block consists of pages
	3. data are read and written in units of pages. 
	4. a page can be written only after the entire block to  which it belongs has been erased 
	   (typically, this means that all bits in the block are set to 1), and any other pages in this block with 
	   useful data must be copied to a new (erased) block. However, once a block is erased, each page in the block 
	   can be written once with no further erasing. Therefore, reading from SSDs is faster than writing
	 
